Writing blog for Pritunl (#615)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/blog/2020-05-04-pritunl.md

---
title: "From OpenVPN to Pritunl VPN: The transition"
slug: pritunl
date: 2020-05-04T12:00:00-04:00
author: Angelos Kyratzakos
github: angeloskyratzakos
community: angelos.kyratzakos
---

// JW note: I think a small section here or in the below paragraph talking about the importance of a good and reliable VPN when running a SaaS service while working remotely would be good. Gives people who aren't familiar with VPNs some background on why this was important for us to do

> Many of us we are using VPN to access internal-private resources of the infrastructure. A majority of which is using OpenVPN as a solution to host those VPN connections on their own servers. [OpenVPN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenVPN) is a widely used software which was also our selection to be used as a quickly and reliable solution to access our internal infrastructure. After using it a while we needed a better solution in terms of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many organizations use a VPN to access internal private infrastructure and resources, a majority of which use OpenVPN as a solution to host those VPN connections on their own servers. [OpenVPN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenVPN) is a widely used software which was also our selection to be used as a quick and reliable solution to access our internal infrastructure. After using it a while we needed a better solution in terms of:
```

- High Availability (HA)
- Auditing

> - Supporting better access control (e.g. only SREs can access production servers and developers to access development account)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Supporting better access control (e.g. only SREs can access production servers and only developers can access development accounts)
```

- Working with SSO, particularly OneLogin

> After some investigation of the team, we ended up with [Pritunl](https://pritunl.com/) as it covered our needs and its pricing was reasonably for our scale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After some investigation, we ended up with [Pritunl](https://pritunl.com/) as it covered our needs and its pricing was reasonable for our scale.
```

// JW note: Maybe a small section here talking about Pritunl a little more. e.g. a bit about the company, the product, why we liked it, etc.

> After some investigation of the team, we ended up with [Pritunl](https://pritunl.com/) as it covered our needs and its pricing was reasonably for our scale.

Reviewer: This can be removed as it's a duplicate.

#### Pritunl - Infrastructure
To deploy Pritunl in our infrastructure, we used [Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/). The module we wrote can be found [here](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-cloud-monitoring/tree/master/terraform/aws/modules/pritunl) as an example for how to deploy Pritunl. The infrastructure consists of:

> - 1 Route53 record,  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 1 Route53 record  
```

> - 1 Network Load Balancer, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 1 Network Load Balancer 
```

> - 2 AutoScaling Groups (ASG) and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 2 AutoScaling Groups (ASGs)
```

> - a MongoDB Atlas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 1 MongoDB Atlas
```

{{< figure src="/blog/2020-05-04-pritunl/Pritunl_architecture.png" alt="Pritunl Architecture">}}

> ##### Why 2 AutoScaling Groups?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Why two AutoScaling Groups?
```

> The selection of 2 ASGs with one instance has been done due to the nessesity of having the same Elastic Network Interface (ENI), which results on having the same private and public IPs. This is useful on whitelisting those IPs into the Security Groups that Pritunl-VPN needs to access internally such as our internal Gitlab. This can be achieved by attaching those ENIs as a secondary network interfaces on the instance, check appendix [Attach second ENI](#attach-second-eni)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The selection of two ASGs with one instance has been done due to the necessity of having the same Elastic Network Interface (ENI), which results on having the same private and public IPs. This is useful on whitelisting those IPs into the Security Groups that Pritunl-VPN needs to access internally such as our internal GitLab. 

This can be achieved by attaching those ENIs as a secondary network interfaces on the instance, check appendix [Attach second ENI](#attach-second-eni).
```

> You can create manually 2 ENIs (we selected the 6th address of each subnet 10.0.0.6 and 10.0.16.6) and attach Public IPs to them. Then you can provide the list of the ENI IDs with the variable (list) `fixed_eni` on terraform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can manually create two ENIs (we selected the 6th address of each subnet 10.0.0.6 and 10.0.16.6) and attach public IPs to them. Then you can provide the list of the ENI IDs with the variable (list) `fixed_eni` on Terraform.
```

##### MongoDB Atlas

> Initially, we checked the [AWS DocumentDB](https://aws.amazon.com/documentdb) solution, but it was quite expensive, as it starts from $0.28/hr for 1 db.r5.large instance. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initially, we checked the [AWS DocumentDB](https://aws.amazon.com/documentdb) solution, but it was quite expensive, as it starts from $0.28/hr for one ``db.r5.large`` instance. 
```

> Next, we deployed 2 instances and installed/configured a MongoDB cluster, but maintaining and making sure that HA works was a big overhead. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we deployed two instances and installed/configured a MongoDB cluster, but maintaining and making sure that HA worked effectively was a big overhead. 
```

> Thus, we selected to use [MongoDB Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas) as it is cheaper(starts also from free tier) and easier to setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, we selected to use [MongoDB Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas) as it is cheaper (starts also from free tier) and easier to setup.
```

> After the creation of the MongoDB Atlas, we added Pritunl's Public IPs on the whitelist of the Atlas cluster and we connected to the Atlas cluster locally to create a new Database in it with a name `pritunl` ([guide on how-to-connect](https://docs.atlas.mongodb.com/getting-started/)). Also check [Pritunl documentation for MongoDB Atlas.](https://docs.pritunl.com/docs/mongodb-atlas)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the creation of the MongoDB Atlas, we added Pritunl's public IPs on the whitelist of the Atlas cluster and we connected to the Atlas cluster locally to create a new database in it called `pritunl` ([guide on how-to-connect](https://docs.atlas.mongodb.com/getting-started/)). Also check [Pritunl documentation for MongoDB Atlas](https://docs.pritunl.com/docs/mongodb-atlas).
```

> To setup the MongoDB URI which looks like: `mongodb+srv://pritunl:password@pritunl-mongodb-xxxxx.mongodb.net/pritunl` use the variable (string) `mongodb_uri` on terraform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set up the MongoDB URI (`mongodb+srv://pritunl:password@pritunl-mongodb-xxxxx.mongodb.net/pritunl`) use the variable (string) `mongodb_uri` on Terraform.
```

##### Network Load Balancer
The Network Load Balancer (NLB) which is in front of the instances which has 5 listeners as shown below. There are 3 listeners for VPN (on ports 1194, 1195, 1196) that can be used for the servers inside the Pritunl. Currently, we are using only the port 1194, so the rest ones are for future usage.

{{< figure src="/blog/2020-05-04-pritunl/Pritunl_NetworkLB.png" alt="Pritunl Network Load Balancer">}}

> #### Pritunl - Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Pritunl configuration
```

Pritunl is installed via the [userdata](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-cloud-monitoring/tree/master/terraform/aws/modules/pritunl/userdata.sh). As the instances do not store any configuration items except the MongoDB URI, each instance needs toconnect to the MongoDB as it gets all the configuration is needed and then the instance joins the Pritunl cluster.

##### Initial setup
As per [Pritunl documentation](https://docs.pritunl.com/docs/configuration-5#initial-setup):

> - SSH into one of the pritunl instances by using [Session-manager](https://console.aws.amazon.com/systems-manager/session-manager/sessions?region=us-east-1),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SSH into one of the Pritunl instances by using [Session-manager](https://console.aws.amazon.com/systems-manager/session-manager/sessions?region=us-east-1).
```

> - run: `sudo pritunl default-password` to get the default username and password,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Run: `sudo pritunl default-password` to get the default username and password.
```

> - go to your login page of Pritunl and use the credentials from previous step,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Navigate to the Pritunl log in page and use the credentials from the previous step.
```

> - create a user `pritunl` and add a new password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a user `pritunl` and add a new password.
```

##### Organization and server setup
As per [Pritunl documentation](https://docs.pritunl.com/docs/connecting):

> - go into *Users* section and create a new organization, i.e. `devs_org`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Navigate to *Users* and create a new organization, e.g. `devs_org`
```

> - go into *Servers* section and create a new server,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Navigate to *Servers* and create a new server:
```

  - Name: `devs_server`

>   - Port: `1194` or any other port that you have setup for VPN access, check [NLB](#network-load-balancer)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Port: `1194` (or any other port that you have setup for VPN access, check [NLB](#network-load-balancer))
```

>   - DNS Server: `10.0.0.2, 8.8.8.8` where 10.0.0.2 is the DNS resolution of the subnet (2nd IP of each subnet is used for DNS resolution and our VPC where Pritunl is running has peering with all the other VPCs, so it is able to resolve all the names inside our network)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - DNS Server: `10.0.0.2, 8.8.8.8` where 10.0.0.2 is the DNS resolution of the subnet. The second IP of each subnet is used for DNS resolution and our VPC where Pritunl is running has peering with all the other VPCs, so it is able to resolve all the names inside our network.
```

>   - save it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Save your changes.
```

> - remove the `0.0.0.0/0` route from the `devs_server`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Remove the `0.0.0.0/0` route from the `devs_server`.
```

> - select the `Attach Organization` to attach `devs_org` with `devs_server`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Select **Attach Organization** to attach `devs_org` with `devs_server`.
```

> - select the `Attach host` to attach the 2 hosts(instances) into it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Select **Attach host** to attach the two hosts (instances).
```

> - select `Add Route` (make sure at the bottom the server points to `devs_server`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Select **Add Route** (ensure that the server points to `devs_server`).
```

>   - need to add the DNS resolution as we have set it up above on the `DNS Server`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - You'll need to add the DNS resolution as we have set it up above on the `DNS Server`:
```

    - 10.0.0.2/32 DNS resolution

>   - need to add all the routes that this server will have access(i.e. other VPCs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - You'll need to add all the routes that this server will need to access (i.e. other VPCs)
```

    (add routes and each comment for clarity)

>     i.e:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    e.g.:
```

    - 10.8.0.0/16 prod VPC
    - 10.16.0.0/16 staging VPC

>     - wherever else you want the Pritunl/VPN to have access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Wherever else you want the Pritunl/VPN to have access.
```

- Start the server with `Start Server` button

#### Enabling OneLogin

> To enable Onelogin, Pritunl Enterprise (with subscription) is needed. Otherwise the configuration is not appearing into the `Settings` on the top right. Then, you will need to setup a new app inside OneLogin(admin is needed) and you will need to paste that information inside Pritunl:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable Onelogin, Pritunl Enterprise (with subscription) is needed, otherwise the configuration won't display in the **Settings**. Then, you will need to set up a new app inside OneLogin (*admin* access is needed) and you will need to paste that information inside Pritunl:
```

- Single Sign-On: `OneLogin`
- OneLogin App ID: `1234567`
- SAML Sign-On URL: `https://your-company.onelogin.com/trust/saml2/http-redirect/sso/xxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxx`
- SAML Issuer URL: `https://app.onelogin.com/saml/metadata/xxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxx`

> - OneLogin API Client ID, OneLogin API Client Secret and the SAML Certificate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- OneLogin API Client ID, OneLogin API Client Secret, and the SAML Certificate.
```

---
title: "From OpenVPN to Pritunl VPN: The transition"
slug: pritunl

> date: 2020-05-04T12:00:00-04:00

Reviewer 2: Need to update the date to latest before merge

Author: you're right Joram! will update it before merging

author: Angelos Kyratzakos
github: angeloskyratzakos
community: angelos.kyratzakos
---

> Usually companies are using office's network to prevent unauthorized people to connect to their private network and by using their own network infrastructure/connectivity they can maintain their desirable level of security for their data. But it would be convenient to connect to "that private network" while they are away from office's building while using an internet connection. To solve that problem, VPN (Virtual Private Network)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually organizations use an internal network to prevent unauthorized people from connecting to their private network and by using their own network infrastructure/connectivity they can maintain their desirable level of security for their data. But it would be convenient for users to connect to that private network while they are away from the office's building, on their own internet connection. To solve that problem, VPN (Virtual Private Network)
```

> is used to allow authorized remote access to company's private network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is used to allow authorized remote access to an organization's private network.
```

> Working in a [fully remote company as Mattermost is](https://docs.mattermost.com/process/working-at-mattermost.html#work-anywhere), creates the need for employees to use a VPN connection in order to be able to access internal private infrastructure and resources. A vast majority of companies use OpenVPN as a solution to host those VPN connections on their own servers. [OpenVPN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenVPN) is a widely used software and protocol which was also our selection to be used as a quick and reliable solution to access our internal infrastructure. After using it a while we needed a better solution in terms of:

Author: @justinegeffen I have added/changed that section

> Working in a [fully remote company as Mattermost is](https://docs.mattermost.com/process/working-at-mattermost.html#work-anywhere), creates the need for employees to use a VPN connection in order to be able to access internal private infrastructure and resources. A vast majority of companies use OpenVPN as a solution to host those VPN connections on their own servers. [OpenVPN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenVPN) is a widely used software and protocol which was also our selection to be used as a quick and reliable solution to access our internal infrastructure. After using it a while we needed a better solution in terms of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Working in a [fully remote company like Mattermost is](https://docs.mattermost.com/process/working-at-mattermost.html#work-anywhere), creates the need for employees to use a VPN connection in order to be able to access internal private infrastructure and resources. A vast majority of companies use OpenVPN as a solution to host those VPN connections on their own servers. [OpenVPN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenVPN) is a widely used software and protocol which was also our selection to be used as a quick and reliable solution to access our internal infrastructure. After using it a while we needed a better solution in terms of:
```

- High Availability (HA)
- Auditing
- Supporting better access control (e.g. only SREs can access production servers and only developers can access development accounts)
- Working with SSO, particularly OneLogin

> After some investigation, we ended up with [Pritunl](https://pritunl.com/) as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After some investigation, we ended up with [Pritunl](https://pritunl.com/) because:
```

> - it is built on the OpenVPN protocol,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It's built on the OpenVPN protocol
```

> - it is [open source](https://github.com/pritunl/pritunl),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It's [open source](https://github.com/pritunl/pritunl)
```

> - Pritunl client can be installed on any platform,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Pritunl client can be installed on any platform
```

> - its pricing is reasonable for our scale,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Its pricing is reasonable for our scale
```

> - hides the complete configuration (user and server management) overhead behind the scenes of the web interface.

Author: and this one as well, thank you very much for your help @justinegeffen

Reviewer: No problem at all, happy to help. :)

> - hides the complete configuration (user and server management) overhead behind the scenes of the web interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It hides the complete configuration (user and server management) overhead behind the scenes of the web interface
```

> #### Pritunl - Infrastructure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Pritunl infrastructure
```

To deploy Pritunl in our infrastructure, we used [Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/). The module we wrote can be found [here](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-cloud-monitoring/tree/master/terraform/aws/modules/pritunl) as an example for how to deploy Pritunl. The infrastructure consists of:

> - 1 Route53 record  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- One Route53 record  
```

- One network load balancer 
- Two AutoScaling Groups (ASGs)
- One MongoDB Atlas

{{< figure src="/blog/2020-05-04-pritunl/Pritunl_architecture.png" alt="Pritunl Architecture">}}

##### Why two AutoScaling Groups?

> The selection of two ASGs with one instance has been done due to the necessity of having the same Elastic Network Interface (ENI), which results on having the same private and public IPs. This is useful on whitelisting those IPs into the Security Groups that Pritunl-VPN needs to access internally such as our internal GitLab. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The selection of two ASGs with one instance has been done due to the necessity of having the same Elastic Network Interface (ENI), which results on having the same private and public IPs. This is useful when whitelisting those IPs into the Security Groups that Pritunl-VPN needs to access internally such as our internal GitLab. 
```

This can be achieved by attaching those ENIs as a secondary network interfaces on the instance, check appendix [Attach second ENI](#attach-second-eni).

> You can manually create two ENIs (we selected the 6th address of each subnet 10.0.0.6 and 10.0.16.6) and attach public IPs to them. Then you can provide the list of the ENI IDs with the variable (list) `fixed_eni` on Terraform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can manually create two ENIs (we selected the sixth address of each subnet `10.0.0.6` and `10.0.16.6`) and attach public IPs to them. Then you can provide the list of the ENI IDs with the variable (list) `fixed_eni` on Terraform.
```

##### MongoDB Atlas
Initially, we checked the [AWS DocumentDB](https://aws.amazon.com/documentdb) solution, but it was quite expensive, as it starts from $0.28/hr for one `db.r5.large` instance. 
Next, we deployed two instances and installed/configured a MongoDB cluster, but maintaining and making sure that HA worked effectively was a big overhead. 

> Thus, we selected to use [MongoDB Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas) as it is cheaper (starts also from free tier) and easier to setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, we selected to use [MongoDB Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas) as it is cheaper (starts also from free tier) and easier to set up.
```

After the creation of the MongoDB Atlas, we added Pritunl's public IPs on the whitelist of the Atlas cluster and we connected to the Atlas cluster locally to create a new database in it called `pritunl` ([guide on how-to-connect](https://docs.atlas.mongodb.com/getting-started/)). Also check [Pritunl documentation for MongoDB Atlas](https://docs.pritunl.com/docs/mongodb-atlas).

To set up the MongoDB URI (`mongodb+srv://pritunl:password@pritunl-mongodb-xxxxx.mongodb.net/pritunl`) use the variable (string) `mongodb_uri` on Terraform.

##### Network Load Balancer

> The Network Load Balancer (NLB) which is in front of the instances which has 5 listeners as shown below. There are 3 listeners for VPN (on ports 1194, 1195, 1196) that can be used for the servers inside the Pritunl. Currently, we are using only the port 1194, so the rest ones are for future usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Network Load Balancer (NLB) which is in front of the instances which has five listeners as shown below. There are three listeners for VPN (on ports `1194`, `1195`, `1196`) that can be used for the servers inside the Pritunl. Currently, we are using only port `1194`, so the rest are for future usage.
```

{{< figure src="/blog/2020-05-04-pritunl/Pritunl_NetworkLB.png" alt="Pritunl Network Load Balancer">}}

#### Pritunl configuration

> Pritunl is installed via the [userdata](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-cloud-monitoring/tree/master/terraform/aws/modules/pritunl/userdata.sh). As the instances do not store any configuration items except the MongoDB URI, each instance needs toconnect to the MongoDB as it gets all the configuration is needed and then the instance joins the Pritunl cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pritunl is installed via the [userdata](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-cloud-monitoring/tree/master/terraform/aws/modules/pritunl/userdata.sh). As the instances do not store any configuration items except the MongoDB URI, each instance needs to connect to the MongoDB to obtain the required configuration and then the instance joins the Pritunl cluster.
```

##### Initial setup
As per [Pritunl documentation](https://docs.pritunl.com/docs/configuration-5#initial-setup):
- SSH into one of the Pritunl instances by using [Session-manager](https://console.aws.amazon.com/systems-manager/session-manager/sessions?region=us-east-1).
- Run: `sudo pritunl default-password` to get the default username and password.
- Navigate to the Pritunl log in page and use the credentials from the previous step.

> - Create a user `pritunl` and add a new password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a user *pritunl* and add a new password.
```

##### Organization and server setup
As per [Pritunl documentation](https://docs.pritunl.com/docs/connecting):

> - Navigate to *Users* and create a new organization, e.g. `devs_org`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Navigate to **Users** and create a new organization, e.g. `devs_org`
```

> - Navigate to *Servers* and create a new server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Navigate to **Servers** and create a new server:
```

  - Name: `devs_server`
  - Port: `1194` (or any other port that you have setup for VPN access, check [NLB](#network-load-balancer))

>   - DNS Server: `10.0.0.2, 8.8.8.8` where 10.0.0.2 is the DNS resolution of the subnet. The second IP of each subnet is used for DNS resolution and our VPC where Pritunl is running has peering with all the other VPCs, so it is able to resolve all the names inside our network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - DNS Server: `10.0.0.2, 8.8.8.8` where `10.0.0.2` is the DNS resolution of the subnet. The second IP of each subnet is used for DNS resolution and our VPC where Pritunl is running has peering with all the other VPCs, so it is able to resolve all the names inside our network.
```

  - Save your changes.
- Remove the `0.0.0.0/0` route from the `devs_server`.
- Select **Attach Organization** to attach `devs_org` with `devs_server`.
- Select **Attach host** to attach the two hosts (instances).
- Select **Add Route** (ensure that the server points to `devs_server`).
  - You'll need to add the DNS resolution as we have set it up above on the `DNS Server`:
    - 10.0.0.2/32 DNS resolution
  - You'll need to add all the routes that this server will need to access (i.e. other VPCs)
    (add routes and each comment for clarity)
    e.g.:
    - 10.8.0.0/16 prod VPC
    - 10.16.0.0/16 staging VPC

>     - Wherever else you want the Pritunl/VPN to have access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Wherever else you want the Pritunl/VPN to have access
```

- Start the server with `Start Server` button

> 

Reviewer: These extra lines can be deleted. :)

NETWORKINTERFACEIP=$(aws ec2 describe-network-interfaces --network-interface-ids $NETWORKINTERFACEID --region us-east-1 --query 'NetworkInterfaces[].[PrivateIpAddress]' --output text)
aws ec2 attach-network-interface --network-interface-id $NETWORKINTERFACEID --instance-id $INSTANCEID --device-index 1 --region us-east-1

printf "\n### Configuring instance to use secondary ENI ###\n"
SUFFIXDEFAULTIP=$(echo $NETWORKINTERFACEIP | sed 's/\.[^.]*$//')
cat <<EOF > /etc/netplan/51-eth1.yaml
network:
  version: 2
  renderer: networkd
  ethernets:
    eth1:
      addresses:
       - $NETWORKINTERFACEIP/20
      dhcp4: no
      routes:
       - to: 0.0.0.0/0
         via: $SUFFIXDEFAULTIP.1 # Default gateway
         table: 1000
       - to: $NETWORKINTERFACEIP
         via: 0.0.0.0
         scope: link
         table: 1000
      routing-policy:
        - from: $NETWORKINTERFACEIP
          table: 1000
EOF
netplan --debug apply
```

##### Pritunl API sample

> In order to invoke the Pritunl API, we had to do some changes on the python code that exists [here](https://pritunl.com/api.html) as below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to invoke the Pritunl API, we had to make some changes on the python code that exists [here](https://pritunl.com/api.html) as below:
```
